Before getting into some of the more practical building blocks of CI pipelines,
I'd like to give you a tip that will help you
design more maintainable and effective configurations.
There's a principle in software engineering called
single responsibility principle. You may have heard of it.
The basic idea of single responsibility principle or
SRP is that structure should have only one responsibility,
and that that structure should be encapsulated or self-contained.
CI may not have classes, modules,
and functions like we do while programming,
but we can still apply the spirit of the principle here.
I've seen some pipelines that needed some SRP love for sure.
How about a job named build that compiles, but also zips,
creates a Docker container,
uploads it to registry,
kicks off a deployment,
and has a rollback mixed in there somewhere?
Trying to unpack and understand a job like that is really hard work.
It's not impossible, it's just definitely harder than it should be.
Now, if the same job were to be split up into smaller jobs,
each adhering to SRP,
then it's a much easier situation to understand and maintain.
In summary, the principle tries to help engineers develop
systems that are smaller, less tangled,
easier to comprehend, and easier to maintain by limiting
the responsibilities of each individual piece to just one.
One way to move in this direction is by naming our jobs specifically and expressively.
I'd like to state the goal somehow in the name.
If the goal is to compile code,
I might, for example, call the job compile.
By giving specific goal oriented names,
we're more likely to limit the responsibilities of our jobs.